total production and consumption of industrial wood prod-In contrast, worldwide most forestland (84%) is said to be ucts; developing countries produce and consume about publicly owned, although information is spotty.9
90% of wood used as firewood. Timber for construction, In the last several decades, world trade in timber does pulp, and paper makes up approximately 90% of the world not appear to have grown much, if at all, based on the infor-timber trade; the rest consists of hardwoods used for furni-mation reported by nations to the United Nations Food and ture, such as teak, mahogany, oak, and maple. North Ameri-Agriculture Organization. Thus, the amount traded annu-ca is the world’s dominant supplier. Total global production/
ally (about 1.5 billion m3, as mentioned earlier) is a reason-consumption is about 1.5 billion m3 annually. To think of able estimate of the total present world demand for the 6.6
this in terms easier to relate to, a cubic meter of timber is a billion people on Earth, at their present standards of living.

block of wood 1 meter thick on each side. A billion cubic The fundamental questions are whether and how Earth’s meters would be a block of wood 1 meter (39 inches) thick forests can continue to produce at least this amount of tim-in a square 1,000 km (621 miles) long on each side. This ber for an indefinite period, and whether and how they can is a distance greater than that between Washington, DC, produce even more as the world’s human population contin-and Atlanta, Georgia, and longer than the distance between ues to grow and as standards of living rise worldwide. Keep San Diego and Sacramento, California. The great pyramid in mind, all of this has to happen while forests continue to of Giza, Egypt, has a volume of more than 2.5 million cubic perform their other functions, which include public-service meters, so the amount of timber consumed in a year would functions, biological conservation functions, and functions fill 600 great pyramids of Egypt.

involving the aesthetic and spiritual needs of people.

The United States has approximately 304 million
In terms of the themes of this book, the question is: hectares (751 million acres) of forests, of which 86 million How can forest production be sustainable while meeting hectares (212 million acres) are considered commercial-the needs of people and nature? The answer involves sci-grade forest, defined as forest capable of producing at least ence and values.

( Source: U.S. Forest Service, Northern Research Station.) As we mentioned, wood is a major energy source in so much of the land, they can play an especially important many parts of the world. Some 63% of all wood produced role in the biosphere (Figure 12.7):
in the world, or 2.1 million m3, is used for firewood. Fire-1. By changing the color of the surface and thus the wood provides 5% of the world’s total energy use,10 2% of amount of sunlight reflected and absorbed.

total commercial energy in developed countries, but 15%
of the energy in developing countries, and is the major 2. By increasing the amount of water transpired and source of energy for most countries of sub-Saharan Africa, evaporated from the surface to the atmosphere.

Central America, and continental Southeast Asia.11
3. By changing the rate at which greenhouse gases are As the human population grows, the use of firewood released from Earth’s surface into the atmosphere.

increases. In this situation, management is essential, including management of woodland stands (an informal 4. By changing “surface roughness,” which affects wind term that foresters use to refer to groups of trees) to im-speed at the surface.

prove growth. However, well-planned management of fire-In general, vegetation warms the Earth by making the wood stands has been the exception rather than the rule.

surface darker, so it absorbs more sunlight and reflects less.

The contrast is especially strong between the dark needles How Forests Affect the Whole Earth
of conifers and winter snow in northern forests and between the dark green of shrublands and the yellowish soils Trees affect the earth by evaporating water, slowing erosion, of many semiarid climates. Vegetation in general and for-and providing habitat for wildlife (see Figure 12.6). Trees ests in particular tend to evaporate more water than bare can also affect climate. Indeed, vegetation of any kind can surfaces. This is because the total surface area of the many affect the atmosphere in four ways, and since forests cover leaves is many times larger than the area of the soil surface.


Four ways that a forest (or a vegetated area) can affect the atmosphere: (1) Some solar radiation is absorbed by vegetation and some is reflected, changing the local energy Cool
budget, compared to a nonforest environment; (2) evaporation and microclimates
transpiration from plants, together called evapotranspiration, transfers water to the atmosphere; (3) photosynthesis by trees releases oxygen into the atmosphere and removes carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas, cooling the temperature of the atmosphere; and (4) near-surface wind is reduced because the vegetation —especially trees—produces roughness near the ground that slows the wind.
Is this increased evaporation good or bad? That depends on one’s goals. Increasing evaporation means that White birch
Balsam fir
less water runs off the surface. This reduces erosion. Although increased evaporation also means that less water Quaking aspen
is available for our own water supply and for streams, in White cedar
most situations the ecological and environmental bene-120
fits of increased evaporation outweigh the disadvantages.

Each species of tree has its own niche (see Chapter 5) and 20
is thus adapted to specific environmental conditions. For Bog
example, in boreal forests, one of the determinants of a Water table
Base of soil
tree niche is the water content of the soil. White birch Bedrock
grows well in dry soils; balsam fir in well-watered sites; F I G U R E 1 2 . 8 Some characteristics of tree niches. Tree species and northern white cedar in bogs (Figure 12.8).

have evolved to be adapted to different kinds of environments. In Another determinant of a tree’s niche is its tolerance northern boreal forests, white birch grows on dry sites (and early-of shade. Some trees, such as birch and cherry, can grow successional sites); balsam fir grows in wetter soils, up to wetlands; only in the bright sun of open areas and are therefore and white cedar grows in even the wetter sites of northern bogs.

found in clearings and called “shade-intolerant.” Other species, such as sugar maple and beech, can grow in deep shade and are called “shade-tolerant.”
not reach the surface and will die before they can germi-Most of the big trees of the western United States re-nate. Some trees are adapted to early stages of succession, quire open, bright conditions and certain kinds of distur-where sites are open and there is bright sunlight. Others are bances in order to germinate and survive the early stages adapted to later stages of succession, where there is a high of their lives. These trees include coastal redwood, which density of trees (see the discussion of ecological succession wins in competition with other species only if both fires in Chapter 5).

and floods occasionally occur; Douglas fir, which begins Understanding the niches of individual tree species its growth in openings; and the giant sequoia, whose seeds helps us to determine where we might best plant them as will germinate only on bare, mineral soil—where there a commercial crop, and where they might best contribute is a thick layer of organic mulch, the sequoia’s seeds can-to biological conservation or to landscape beauty.

The Life of a Tree
To solve the big issues about forestry, we need to understand molecular oxygen. This simple sugar is then combined with how a tree grows, how an ecosystem works, and how forest-other chemical elements to provide all the compounds that ers have managed forestland (Figure 12.9). Leaves of a tree the tree uses.

take up carbon dioxide from the air and absorb sunlight.

Tree roots take up water, along with chemical elements These, in combination with water transported up from the dissolved in the water and small inorganic compounds, such roots, provide the energy and chemical elements for leaves to as the nitrate or ammonia necessary to make proteins. Often carry out photosynthesis. Through photosynthesis, the leaves the process of extracting minerals and compounds from convert carbon dioxide and water into a simple sugar and the soil is aided by symbiotic relationships between the tree
 How a tree grows. ( Source: C.H. Stoddard, Essentials of Forestry Practice, 3rd ed. [New York: Wiley, 1978].) roots and fungi. Tree roots release sugars and other com-and roots. Xylem, farther inside (Figure 12.9), transports pounds that are food for the fungi, and the fungi benefit the water and inorganic molecules upward to the leaves. Water is tree as well.

transported upward by a sun-powered pump— that is, sunlight Leaves and roots are connected by two transportation provides energy to pump the water up the tree by heating systems. Phloem, on the inside of the living part of the bark, leaves so they evaporate water. Water from below is then pulled transports sugars and other organic compounds down to stems upward to replace water that evaporated.

Forest Management
stands, which have at least three distinct age classes. In even-aged stands, trees are approximately the same height but
A Forester’s View of a Forest
differ in girth and vigor.

Traditionally, foresters have managed trees locally in stands.

A forest that has never been cut is called a virgin forest Trees in a stand are usually of the same species or group of or sometimes an old-growth forest. A forest that has been species and often at the same successional stage. Stands can cut and has regrown is called a second-growth forest.

be small (half a hectare) to medium size (several hundred Although the term old-growth forest has gained popular-hectares) and are classified by foresters on the basis of tree ity in several well-publicized disputes about forests, it is composition. The two major kinds of commercial stands not a scientific term and does not yet have an agreed-on, are even-aged stands, where all live trees began growth from precise meaning. Another important management term is seeds and roots germinating the same year, and uneven-aged rotation time, the time between cuts of a stand.

Foresters and forest ecologists group the trees in a for-In strip-cutting, narrow rows of forest are cut, leav-est into the dominants (the tallest, most common, and ing wooded corridors whose trees provide seeds. Strip-most vigorous), codominants (fairly common, sharing cutting offers several advantages, such as protection the canopy or top part of the forest), intermediate (form-against erosion.

ing a layer of growth below dominants), and suppressed Shelterwood cutting is the practice of cutting dead (growing in the understory). The productivity of a forest and less desirable trees first, and later cutting mature varies according to soil fertility, water supply, and local trees. As a result, there are always young trees left in the climate. Foresters classify sites by site quality, which is forest.

the maximum timber crop the site can produce in a given Seed-tree cutting removes all but a few seed trees time. Site quality can decline with poor management.

(mature trees with good genetic characteristics and high Although forests are complex and difficult to manage, seed production) to promote regeneration of the forest.

one advantage they have over many other ecosystems is Scientists have tested the effects of clear-cutting, which that trees provide easily obtained information that can be is one of the most controversial forest practices.12, 13, 14
a great help to us. For example, the age and growth rate of For example, in the U.S. Forest Service Hubbard Brook trees can be measured from tree rings. In temperate and experimental forest in New Hampshire, an entire water-boreal forests, trees produce one growth ring per year.

shed was clear-cut, and herbicides were applied to prevent regrowth for two years.14 The results were dramatic. Ero-
Harvesting Trees
sion increased, and the pattern of water runoff changed Managing forests that will be harvested can involve re-substantially. The exposed soil decayed more rapidly, and moving poorly formed and unproductive trees (or selected the concentrations of nitrates in the stream water exceeded other trees) to permit larger trees to grow faster, planting public-health standards. In another experiment, at the U.S.

genetically controlled seedlings, controlling pests and dis-Forest Service H.J. Andrews experimental forest in Oregon, eases, and fertilizing the soil. Forest geneticists breed new a forest where rainfall is high (about 240 cm, or 94 in., strains of trees just as agricultural geneticists breed new annually), clear-cutting greatly increased the frequency of strains of crops. There has been relatively little success in landslides, as did the construction of logging roads.15
controlling forest diseases, which are primarily fungal.

Clear-cutting also changes chemical cycling in for-Harvesting can be done in several ways. Clear- cutting ests and can open the way for the soil to lose chemical (Figure 12.10) is the cutting of all trees in a stand at the elements necessary for life. Exposed to sun and rain, the same time. Alternatives to clear-cutting are selective cutting, ground becomes warmer. This accelerates the process of strip-cutting, shelterwood cutting, and seed-tree cutting.

decay, with chemical elements, such as nitrogen, converted In selective cutting, individual trees are marked and more rapidly to forms that are water-soluble and thus cut. Sometimes smaller, poorly formed trees are selectively readily lost in runoff during rains (Figure 12.11).16
removed, a practice called thinning. At other times, trees The Forest Service experiments show that clear-cutting of specific species and sizes are removed. For example, can be a poor practice on steep slopes in areas of moderate some forestry companies in Costa Rica cut only some of to heavy rainfall. The worst effects of clear-cutting resulted the largest mahogany trees, leaving less valuable trees to from the logging of vast areas of North America during help maintain the ecosystem and permitting some of the the 19th and early 20th centuries. Clear-cutting on such large mahogany trees to continue to provide seeds for fu-a large scale is neither necessary nor desirable for the best ture generations.

timber production. However, where the ground is level or slightly sloped, where rainfall is moderate, and where the desirable species require open areas for growth, clear-cutting on an appropriate spatial scale may be a useful way to regenerate desirable species. The key here is that clear-cutting is neither all good nor all bad for timber production or forest ecosystems. Its use must be evaluated on a case-by-case basis, taking into account the size of cuts, the environment, and the available species of trees.

Plantations
Sometimes foresters grow trees in a plantation, which is a stand of a single species, typically planted in straight rows (Figure 12.12). Usually plantations are fertilized, sometimes by helicopter, and modern machines har-F I G U R E 1 2 . 1 0 A clear-cut forest in western Washington.

If the data do not indicate whether a particular set of practices has led to sustainable forestry, what can be done? The general approach today is to compare the In short, plantation forestry is a lot like modern agri-actual practices of specific corporations or government culture. Intensive management like this is common in agencies with practices that are believed to be consistent Europe and parts of the northwestern United States and with sustainability. This has become a formal process offers an important alternative solution to the pressure called certification of forestry, and there are organiza-on natural forests. If plantations were used where forest tions whose main function is to certify forest practices.

production was high, then a comparatively small percent-The catch here is that nobody actually knows whether age of the world’s forestland could provide all the world’s the beliefs are correct and therefore whether the prac-

tices will turn out to be sustainable. Since trees take a Because forests cover large, often remote areas that are long time to grow, and a series of harvests is necessary little visited or studied, information is lacking on which to to prove sustainability, the proof lies in the future. De-determine whether the world’s forestlands are expanding or spite this limitation, certification of forestry is becoming shrinking, and precisely how fast and how much. Some ex-common. As practiced today, it is as much an art or a perts argue that there is a worldwide net increase in forests craft as it is a science.

because large areas in the temperate zone, such as the east-Worldwide concern about the need for forest sustain-ern and midwestern United States, were cleared in the 19th ability has led to international programs for certifying for-and early 20th centuries and are now regenerating. Only est practices, as well as to attempts to ban imports of wood recently have programs begun to obtain accurate estimates produced from purportedly unsustainable forest practices.

of the distribution and abundance of forests, and these sug-Some European nations have banned the import of cer-gest that past assessments overestimated forest biomass by tain tropical woods, and some environmental organiza-100 to 400%.22
tions have led demonstrations in support of such bans.

On balance, we believe that the best estimates are those However, there is a gradual movement away from calling suggesting that the rate of deforestation in the 21st century is certified forest practices “sustainable,” instead referring to 7.3 million hectares a year—an annual loss equal to the size
“well-managed forests” or “improved management.”19, 20 And of Panama. The good news is that this is 18% less than the some scientists have begun to call for a new forestry that average annual loss of 8.9 million hectares in the 1990s.23
includes a variety of practices that they believe increase the likelihood of sustainability.

Most basic is accepting the dynamic characteristics of forests—that to remain sustainable over the long term, a forest may have to change in the short term. Some of the broader, science-based concerns are spoken of as a group—the need for ecosystem management and a landscape context. Scientists point out that any application of a certification program creates an experiment and should be treated accordingly. Therefore, any new programs that claim to provide sustainable practices must include, for comparison, control areas where no cutting is done and must also include adequate scientific monitoring of the status of the forest ecosystem.
Deforestation is believed to have increased erosion and caused the loss of an estimated 562 million hectares (1.4
billion acres) of soil worldwide, with an estimated annual loss of 5–6 million hectares.21 Cutting forests in one country affects other countries. For example, Nepal, one of the most mountainous countries in the world, lost more than half its forest cover between 1950 and 1980.

This destabilized soil, increasing the frequency of landslides, amount of runoff, and sediment load in streams.

Many Nepalese streams feed rivers that flow into India (Figure 12.13). Heavy flooding in India’s Ganges Valley has caused about a billion dollars’ worth of property (b)
damage a year and is blamed on the loss of large forested watersheds in Nepal and other countries.20 Nepal Planting pine trees on the steep s